---
title: "Death and Rebirth"
linkTitle: "death-and-rebirth"
subTitle: "subtitle"
date: 2018-05-06T16:57:29-07:00
draft: false
image: "https://farm1.staticflickr.com/977/28068798038_31f8071ddb_h.jpg"
description: "A rebirth for this blog, in search of immortality."
tags: [
    "life",
    "death",
    "beginnings",
    "ends",
]
---

## The Intention

Of late, I have been thinking about life and death and life beyond death.

I now believe that creating everlasting art is the only way to achieve true immortality. Art (and progeny, to a certain extent) is the only way to live beyond the grave.

And since I am not yet anywhere close to creating the kind of art that would qualify even for consideration in the "everlasting" category, I decided to be more intentional about whatever I do create.

Which brings me to this blog, why I decided to nuke the [earlier site](http://web.archive.org/web/20170823141708/http://samudranb.com) and instead rebuild it with some new principles in mind. 

## The Principles 
The principles I tried to follow (as much as possible) are:

### Make My Work Here Last Beyond My Death
My earlier site was a Wordpress-based site hosted on a HostGator shared hosting account. 

This setup came with three problems: 

1. It would not work beyond my death, since the credit card that I use to pay my hosting fees would most probably have been cancelled by then.
2. I grew tired of the shitty service that the HostGators and the BlueHosts of the world provide. After countless attempts with the CS agents of both of the afore-mentioned failed to provide me a successful way to transfer my WP content from one to the other, I gave up and swore off them.
3. I did not want to pay to have this content hosted for the rest of eternity. 

### Retain full control over the presentation
I could have chosen to use the free hosting on Wordpress.com, Medium, etc., but they did not give me as much freedom of information organization as I wanted.

And while I do want an audience for some of what I will write, I also want to retain control over which articles are exposed to which audiences. E.g. I will be publishing professional articles here and then distributing to Linkedin, but not the personal or rant-y ones.

### Avoid advertising-based business models.
While I do not believe advertising itself is evil, I do believe that at some point the interests of most advertising-based companies will diverge from the best interests of their customers. 

> It is difficult to get a man to understand something, when his salary depends on his not understanding it. 
> 
> *- Upton Sinclair*

And since I do not have a way to clearly predict or dilineate between the different companies which would or would not in the future put their own interests above their users, I decided to steer clear of all of them and instead put my faith in a company that makes their money by providing a valuable and paid service to their customers - [Github](www.github.com).

## The Stack
That is the story of why (and how) this site came to be on the current stack of:

* Static Site Generation by [Hugo](http://gohugo.io/)
* Hosting on Github pages
* Images on Flickr (Github allows upto 1GB for the Pages repos, and I'd very soon cross that limit if I included the images)

## The Plan

Over the next few months, I will be building out more sections of this site. 

1. I plan to blog a lot more, about my side projects, learning paths and other trains of thoughts. I will be using this site as a notebook to work through the articulation of my ideas and arguments.
2. For each of my side projects:
    1. I will publish my project plans before I start working, in an effort to hold my own future self accountable. I have no doubt I will fail to meet many of my own project milestones - and that I will use as feedback for my next planning.
    2. I will also publish my demos and WIPs. I will seek feedback early and often.
3. For the lessons that I am undertaking, I will also be publishing the plans before hand. For the same reasons as above.

I welcome you and fellow travellers to join me on this journey. 

May we be interesting in, and after, life. 